---
title: A Tribute to Donald Knuth
description: Celebrating the everlasting legacy of a legendary computer scientist
categories: [Computer Science]
tags: [IITB, math, programming]
date: 2024-01-10 23:18 +0530
---
> I put this post together as a fun little activity for the CS310 (Automata Theory) course at IIT Bombay.
At first, I was hesitant to write about Don Knuth because there were already so many write-ups, but I couldn't resist after finding out it was his birthday that day.
I definitely plan to elaborate on these points (and add more) soon.
{: .prompt-info}

## Impacts
Knuth[^homepage] (pronounced as _Ka-NOOTH_) is best known[^wiki] for his magnum opus [The Art of Computer Programming](https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/taocp.html) (TAoCP) volumes (WIP) covering a wide range of topics from sorting to context-free languages.

While working on these volumes, he was disappointed with the quality of typesetting, which led him to develop [TeX]({% post_url 2023-12-17-latex-tips %}) and the beloved Computer Modern fonts, which are now a standard in academia.
 
While developing TeX, he created the [Literate Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming) paradigm, which again impacted millions of programmers.
Who would've thought his _little_ detours would keep making such a huge impact?
 
While I can mention some of his other popular works on [Surreal Numbers](https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/sn.html) or [Things a Computer Scientist Rarely Talks About](https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/things.html), instead I will lastly mention his underrated work on [Concrete Mathematics](https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/gkp.html), which is an amalgamation of CONtinuous and disCRETE mathematics which arose from TAoCP. This book was a very fun read while maintaining rigour at the same time.
 
Happy birthday!

## Videos
### Life Story
#### Podcast
{% include embed/youtube.html id='2GbtLpYvzFQ' %}
#### Playlist
{% include embed/youtube.html id='yOG38GpItpk?list=PLVV0r6CmEsFzeNLngr1JqyQki3wdoGrCn' %}
### Lectures
> Some videos are blocked from embedded video playback on external sites. To accommodate for such cases, you can either click on video links to open it within the YouTube interface or simply refer to this [playlist]({{ site.url_prefixes.youtube.playlist }}PL94E35692EB9D36F3) containing all of his lectures.
{: .prompt-tip}

#### Annual Christmas Lectures 
{% include embed/youtube.html id='3DKo219ZHMw?list=PLoROMvodv4rOAvKVR_dyCigSBMcYjevYB'%}
#### Computer Musings
{% include embed/youtube.html id='0TOK73ij7C0?list=PLoROMvodv4rNMsVRnSJ44WuwbminUqXX2'%}
#### Aha Sessions
{% include embed/youtube.html id='Lg5rrgIfWWg?list=PLoROMvodv4rNbeodV7vqxxxWpe4s_SFty'%}
### Bloopers
_Err and err and err again but less and less and less_
{% include embed/youtube.html id='v678Em6qyzk' %}
{% include embed/youtube.html id='QS8qwMna8_o' %}

## References
[^homepage]: [Don Knuth's Home Page](https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth)
[^wiki]: [Donald Knuth -- Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Knuth)